
In this segment, we'll introduce the topic
of online advertising.
And we'll also discuss the problem of clickthrough rate
prediction.
We see online ads all throughout the internet.
For instance, when I'm reading the news on The New York Times
website, I sometimes see ads for products
that might be of interest to me, such as an online store
like Marc Jacobs, that sells watches.
When performing a web search, I might see ads
related to my search, and when I search for watches on Google,
I see additional watch-related advertisements.
In this case, for Fossil watches,
and for various online stores, including macys.com.
When I'm reading sports, I also see ads, and in this case,
they're ads related to Dr. Pepper.
Overall, online advertising is a multibillion dollar industry,
and it's a growing one.
According to one study, revenue in the US alone was $43 billion
in 2013, which is a 17% increase over the previous year.
In the United States, online advertising
has higher revenue than cable TV,
and nearly the same as broadcast TV.
And in particular, a large source of this revenue
comes from search engines like Google.
The goal of online advertising is to have people click on ads
or somehow otherwise engage with ads, and it's a hard problem.
Although user engagement varies by the type of ad,
engagement can be less than 1%.
Advertisers rely on huge amounts of data available to help
improve with user engagement.
This data is generated by measuring
online human activity, in particular, historical data
about how often a user clicked on various ads.
And this provides us with a valuable source of label data.
And indeed, online advertising is
this canonical large-scale machine learning problem.
Now let's talk a bit more about the different players
involved in online advertising.
First we have the publishers.
Online sites such as The New York Times, Google, or ESPN.
These publishers make money by displaying ads on their sites.
Second, we have the advertisers.
For instance, companies like Marc Jacobs, Fossil,
Macy's, or Dr. Pepper.
Advertisers are willing to pay for their ads
to be displayed on publishers sites as a way
to attract business.
Third, we have the matchmakers, and these
are companies like Google, Microsoft, or Yahoo
that match publishers with advertisers.
This process often occurs in real time.
So in particular, as a user is visiting a publisher site,
the matchmaker dynamically determines
what ad to display on this publisher site.
We've already mentioned that online advertising is
a big business, and as we just discussed,
this money is coming from advertisers.
So it's natural to ask why are advertisers willing to pay?
And there's several different reasons why
they might be willing to pay.
The first is simply for user impressions.
In this case, an advertiser is willing to pay simply
to get their message across to some target audience,
as in the case of a brand awareness campaign.
More often, however, advertisers measure success of an ad
by whether a user is actively engaged with it.
This can mean that a user clicked on the ad
and visited the advertiser's web page,
or even that the user performed some action on the advertiser
web page, such as buying something, or joining a mailing
list.
The most common metric for success
is clickthrough rate prediction.
And this is what we'll be focusing on.
In this pay-per-click setting, an advertiser
pays for ad placements only when a user clicks on the ad.
In order to maximize revenue in a pay-per-click setting,
it's crucial for a matchmaker to have
a sense of how likely it is for a user to click on an ad.
And this is the crux of the clickthrough rate prediction
problem.
This problem involves estimating a conditional probability,
or the probability of a click event
occurring given a set of predicted features.
These features include a variety of information about the ad,
such as its content, its historical performance,
and about the advertiser more generally.
Other information could describe various features
about the specific publisher page
or about the publisher more generally.
And finally, information about the user
is also relevant, such as the user's click history as well as
other information that might be known about the user.
Thankfully, publishers get billions of impressions
each day on their sites.
And this information is readily available.
However, the data is high-dimensional, sparse,
and skewed.
There are hundreds of millions, if not
billions of online users.
There are also millions of publisher pages
on which we can display ads, and there are millions
of unique ads to display.
Additionally, only a small fraction of these ads
actually get clicked on by users,
and thus we have a heavily biased label training set.
Hence, it's not easy to find patterns in this data,
and massive data sets are crucial to improve
our predictive capabilities.
In summary, the goal of the clickthrough rate prediction
problem is to use large amounts of data
to estimate the conditional probability that a user will
click on an ad, given features about the user, the ad,
and the publisher.