
Welcome to the segment of the course on neuroscience.
My name is Jeremy Freeman, and I'm
a group leader at HHMI's Janelia Research Campus, where
I study the function of the brain
and develop computational methods for analyzing
and understanding neuroscience data.
Before describing to you the kinds of analyses
we'll be doing, I want to give a very brief introduction
to neuroscience itself.
I can't possibly cover the entire field of neuroscience
in only 10 minutes.
But I hope to give you an overview
of the kinds of questions we're asking and the kinds of data
that we're collecting and analyzing.
We're going to be talking about the brain.
This is a human brain showing both the cerebral cortex
and subcortical structures, like the cerebellum.
We'll also be talking about animal brains.
There are important differences between the brains of humans
and animals, but we also believe there
to be principles of neural function
that span multiple species.
The brain is just about three pounds of biological matter,
but it's responsible for nearly everything that
makes us us-- what we perceive, how we act, how we think.
And we barely understand how it works.

President Obama put it best when describing a new initiative
for neuroscience research in the US,
called the Brain Initiative.
He said, "As humans, we can identify galaxies light years
away.
We can study particles smaller than an atom.
But we still haven't unlocked the mystery
of the three pounds of matter that sits between our ears."
It's really remarkable how little
we understand about the brain, but it also
makes it an incredibly exciting field.

One way to think about a lot of brain function
is to think of the brain as everything that
happens in between stimulati-- which
is stuff in the outside world-- and behavior-- which
is the stuff that we do.
The brain consists of special cells called neurons,
indicated here as circles.
There are many types.
They're connected to each other in complex ways
and send signals to one another through electrical impulses
called action potentials, or spikes.
The activity of neuronal networks
is responsible for the brain's ability
to process and represent information and guide behavior.

One of the many challenges of neuroscience
is that there are so many neurons.
Here's a figure showing the number
of neurons in different animal species
on a logarithmic scale, all the way
from the several neurons in the snail
to the 100 billion neurons in the human.
Even seemingly simple animals, like the ant,
have hundreds of thousands of neurons.
These large numbers pose a daunting challenge,
both to measuring the activity of all of these neurons
and to understanding their function.

Ideally, we'd study the brain in humans.
There are technologies like functional magnetic resonance
imaging, or FMRI, that make it possible
to non-invasively measure correlates
of neural activity in humans.
FMRI specifically measures changes
in blood oxygenation, which is related to,
but not the same as, neural activity.

We can use FMRI to measure responses in the brain
to different kinds of stimuli.
For example, here we're looking at differential FMRI related
either to the flickering of a pattern-- on the right--
or to the motion of dots-- on the left.
In the bottom, the changes in red
indicate regions of a human brain
that respond to these stimuli.
You can see that the activated regions are all
in a area of the back of the brain,
called the occipital lobe, which is
the part of your brain responsible
for visual processing.
And there are different regions responsible for encoding
motion, on the left, versus encoding the simple flickering
of light, as on the right.

But FMRI is not enough.
First, it's measuring blood oxygenation,
which is only indirectly related to neural activity.
Second, it's incredibly low resolution.
In the human, a single pixel in the images that we were just
looking at corresponds to a region containing about 50,000
neurons.
To understand the detailed structure and function
of the brain, we need to record activity
at the resolution of individual neurons and for many neurons
simultaneously.

An exciting set of new technologies
is making this possible, many developed just
within the last decade.
One approach is to use what's called
a multielectrode recording device.
These are special collections of electrodes
that measure the electrical signaling of many neurons
at high temporal resolution, and thus far have
been used to measure hundreds of neurons simultaneously.
Much larger populations can be recorded
at slightly lower temporal resolutions
by using optical methods.
For these techniques, animals are genetically engineered
so that their neurons light up or fluoresce when active.
And those changes in fluorescence
can be measured by special forms of laser microscopy, generating
time varying images of neural activity.
Two-photon imaging-- which is the most common method used
in mice-- enables the recording of hundreds or thousands
of neurons.
And light-sheet imaging-- which can only
be used in transparent animals, like the larval zebrafish--
enables the recording of up to 100,000 neurons simultaneously.
Here's an example of light-sheet imaging in zebrafish.
The color shows the change in fluorescence, which indicates
the activity of neurons.
The pattern in the upper left that's moving
is the visual stimulus that was presented to the fish.
And the size of the circle underneath that pattern
indicates how strongly the fish swam in response
to the stimulus.
You can see that every time the pattern moves,
the fish swims, the dot gets larger.
And there's a complex dynamic pattern
of activity across its brain.

Here's an example of two-photon imaging in mice.
The animal here is running on a ball
in a tactile virtual reality environment.
And the image on the left shows the activity
of individual neurons turning on and off
in an area called the somatosensory cortex.

I want to briefly highlight just a couple key discoveries that
have been made by recording the activity of neurons.
One incredible example is the discovery
of place cells, which won Edward and May-Britt Moser and John
O'Keefe the Nobel Prize just last year.
In these figures, the black paths
show the trajectory of a mouse running
through a square environment.
The activity of neurons in a special region
called the hippocampus were recorded
using the electrical recording methods I described before.
For two different neurons, we're showing a red dot every time
that neuron fired a response, or action potential.
The neuron on the left responds every time
the animal is at one location in the square.
This is called a place cell.
The neuron on the right is even cooler.
It responds every time the animal
is at one of several locations.
And those locations tile the environment, forming a grid.
This is called a grid cell.
Together, we think that these neurons
underlie the animal's ability to navigate their environment.
But exactly how these cells form and function
still remains a mystery.

Another classic example is orientation tuning.
Turns out that individual neurons
in the visual part of the brain respond to visual patterns
at different orientations.
For example, a neuron might respond the most
to a bar that's vertical, or diagonal, or horizontal.
David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel won a Nobel Prize
for discovering this in the 1950s and '60s.
More recently, people have used the imaging methods
that I described earlier to reveal
the fine-scale organization of these responses.
In this map-- which represents a very, very small fraction
of the mouse brain-- we see how individual neurons
are tuned to different orientations of a bar,
as indicated by their color.
This is a now classic example of how networks of neurons
can detect features of their environment.
And this idea of neurons as feature detectors
is one of the key inspirations behind modern deep learning
approaches to pattern recognition.

New technologies for recording brain activity
are incredibly exciting, but they also
pose data analysis challenges.
A short recording of neural activity
in a small region of the mouse brain
can generate 100 gigabytes of raw data.
A recording of neural activity across the brain of the Larval
zebrafish can generate a terabyte.
And although we're still very far from being
able to measure the activity of the entire mouse brain,
if we could, it would generate hundreds of terabytes or more
in a single experiment.
For this reason, neuroscience needs large scale machine
learning pipelines for processing and analyzing data
at scale.
