
In this segment, I'm going to introduce
the kinds of analyses you'll be performing in the lab.
The data we'll be working with consists
of a collection of measurements in the brain of a larval zebra
fish.
These measurements were made using a method called
light sheet microscopy.
As described in the earlier segment,
the raw data are time varying images
of calcium fluorescence, which is a signal that reflects
the activity of neurons.
The raw data looks something like this movie,
though the version you'll be working with
has been significantly down sampled
for the purpose of the lab.
We'll be asking questions like which brain areas are
active at which times and which brain areas are
activated by different directions
of the visual stimulus.

More specifically, we'll be given
a collection of neural signals that
vary over time derived from the movie like you just saw,
and our goal will be to find representations
of the data using dimensionality reduction that
reveal how responses are organized across both space
and time.

Here we'll briefly walk through an example
of how PCA can be used to answer these questions.
This is very similar to the analysis you'll be doing.
We start with neural signals measured over time.
In this case, across multiple repetitions
of the same stimulus.
Those are the boxes shown in gray.
An initial pre-processing step, which has already
been performed for you, is to average the responses
across the multiple repetitions.
So we start with a collection of many neural signals,
each containing the average response to the stimulus.
We then perform PCA to reduce these high dimensional signals
into a two dimensional space.
What we now have for every neuron
is a pair of numbers that describes
the temporal properties of its response.
To help visualize this two dimensional space,
we map positions in two dimensions
onto the color wheel, and this allows
us to go back and color the brain based
on this representation.
Here's a picture just like the ones
you'll generate in the lab.
This image is a computational map
the shows the spatial organization of neurons
with different properties based on the PCA analysis I just
described.
For example, neurons can be in different regions,
but have the same color, like the neurons in green.
This means that despite being in different locations,
they have very similar responses in terms
of how the response varies over time, as identified
through dimensionality reduction.
